---
layout: page
title: Conclusions
---

Based on our observations of four studios, we believe that design studio pedagogy represents one productive future of the current postpedagogical moment. We believe so, in part, because design studio approaches speak to a number of recent and pressing concerns in rhetoric and composition—like public engagement, collaborative practices, embodiment, and materiality—and also because they provide a way to describe and enact process as a layered phenomenon.

With cautious optimism, then, we want to conclude by offering some preliminary recommendations and caveats for experimenting with design studio methods. These suggestions are meant to highlight concrete, practical ways of implementing design studio pedagogy in twenty-first century writing and rhetoric curricula. 

---

<strong>Assemble your own frame-for-work by surveying the landscape of affordances and constraints in your class and on your campus, but make sure it facilitates interaction that is in some ways high impact, collaborative, DIY, and ecologically-attuned</strong>. Developing frames-for-work can and should involve different configurations of what we have identified as the four features of design studio approaches. While it is tempting to say that our classes will benefit even if we pick and choose from one or two of these features to inform new pedagogical practices, we do not think that is the case. Rather, in order to achieve a rich, well-designed learning environment, all four features seem integral to creating the conditions for this kind of learning. Here are some possibilities to consider when constructing frames-for-work:

- Involve campus partners, community partners, or commercial partners, either by design or through students’ own initiative.
- Craft projects and assignments in ways that give students a chance to interact with each other in a variety of arrangements and modes.
- Expect students to seek knowledge independently in order to complete their project – that it will not all come from you or the assigned readings or even from research in the library – and communicate these expectations.
- Make sure that writing is not the only activity in a writing or rhetoric class; students should also be drawing, taking pictures, recording/editing audio and video, arranging and experimenting with materials, building, coding, and so on.

---

<strong>Talk about process in a new way</strong>. In spite of the coming (and perhaps passing) of the postprocess moment, most of us in the field have never stopped invoking the importance of process in some fashion or another. Rather than thinking of process as a knowable series of tasks, we suggest approaching your course design as a non-linear, flexible workspace. This is not to say that predetermined tasks do not exist; rather, in a studio approach teams will inevitably need to rearrange, invent, and reinvent tasks according to their own needs and work-styles.

Many depictions of the design process have begun to appear in higher education contexts, and we think it is useful to consider a few of the examples we have encountered during the course of our research. Pictured below are three interesting models of design pedagogy from recent conferences. The first picture is a powerpoint slide from Peter Kittle’s presentation at the 2016 Conference on College Composition and Communication. Kittle visualizes design by mapping its process directly onto the conventional steps associated with the writing process. We appreciate this effort to begin to “design-ify” process, which is necessary and important work. Yet, this set of steps still represents a more or less linear, chronological sequence. In other words, renaming the steps in a traditional process model does not transform that model, and therefore it still represents what postprocess theories critique about traditional process. What we find most valuable about Kittle’s visualization, however, is his attention to “release” and “community,” which the other two models pictured below do not consider. In this sense Kittle offers a model that is more high impact than other representations we have seen.

{% include figure.html index="84" %}

The next two photos are of Marlo Ransdell’s slides from her 2016 presentation at the Association of American Colleges & Universities Conference. Ransdell works in the fields of interior design and architecture. One slide depicts writing processes and the other visualizes the design thinking process. In some ways, these slides make improvements on the process represented in Kittle’s presentation. In Ransdell’s slides, process is represented as ambiguous, plural, and – maybe most importantly – recursive. These images more accurately show that students’ individual processes (the “how I work”) will not emerge until they are well into the process of developing projects in collaboration with team members. Much like Arjun Dhillon’s description of “the Squiggle,” in these two slides process is depicted as something that we must attempt to articulate, but which we can never fully know ahead of time.

{% include figure.html index="85" %}

{% include figure.html index="86" %}

Engaging with students in process-talk but in a design-savvy, plural way must play a salient role in design-oriented pedagogy. Adapting or revising “designified” process models similar to the ones featured above will provide students with some initial structure while also giving them the freedom to figure out ways of working and collaborating throughout the development of their projects.

---

<strong>Model the dispositions that you hope to cultivate in students</strong>. The “8 Studio Habits of Mind,” which are published in Studio Thinking (Hetland et al.) and promoted in Harvard’s Project Zero (“Project”), offer one account of helpful dispositions. We found this version for artists–from Rankine-Landers’ “Teaching Channel” blog post–to be especially useful:
8 Studio Habits of Mind
1. Develop Craft: Learning to use tools, materials, artistic conventions; and learning to care for tools, materials, and space.
2. Engage & Persist: Learning to embrace problems of relevance within the art world and/or of personal importance, to develop focus conducive to working and persevering at tasks.
3. Envision: Learning to picture mentally what cannot be directly observed, and imagine possible next steps in making a piece.
4. Express: Learning to create works that convey an idea, a feeling, or a personal meaning.
5. Observe: Learning to attend to visual contexts more closely than ordinary “looking” requires, and thereby to see things that otherwise might not be seen.
6. Reflect: Learning to think and talk with others about an aspect of one’s work or working process, and learning to judge one’s own work and working process and the work of others.
7. Stretch & Explore: Learning to reach beyond one’s capacities, to explore playfully without a preconceived plan, and to embrace the opportunity to learn from mistakes.
8. Understand (Arts) Community: Learning to interact as an artist with other artists (i.e., in classrooms, in local arts organizations, and across the art field) and within the broader society. Arts is in parenthesis here as it can easily be switched with other disciplines, like science or history.

We might turn to sophistic pedagogy to clarify how to cultivate these “Studio Habits of Mind.” As Debra Hawhee notes, “sophistic pedagogy emphasized the materiality of learning, the corporeal acquisition of rhetorical movements through rhythm, repetition, and response. This manner of learning-doing entails “‘getting a feel for’ the work” (160). That is, through repetition and practice, teachers and students can get “a feel for” these habits of mind until they become dispositionally incorporated. However, it is important to point out that these habits of mind will look and feel different for each individual learning situation. This is why response is key. As Hawhee states, “sophistic-style rhetorical training is always bound up with responsiveness within particular contexts” (160). Even as we assemble environments in which students can work, thus enabling them to hone their own repetition-and-response habits, we continually re-invent and co-occupy these spaces with students. Designing spaces for students to co-design with us, in other words, will help us cultivate these dispositions in ourselves, even as we help to cultivate them in students. Design pedagogy requires a deeply collaborative environment where teachers and students necessarily work together to develop practices that can lead to significant learning experiences.

---

<strong>Keep ethics at the center of design approaches</strong>. While terms like design, studio, design thinking, hacking, making, craft, and makerspaces are often deployed in fluid relationships with each other, they are not the same. These terms have very different histories, practices, purposes, and ideologies. For example, design thinking, for many academics, evokes an association with the corporate, for-profit world of start-ups. Sometimes that is enough to repel interest, but not always. In his keynote at the 2016 Thomas R. Watson conference, for instance, Scott Wible discussed how he uses design practices to connect his students at the University of Maryland, College Park to local community members and projects (e.g. non-profits) as opposed to using design thinking pedagogy to forward more business-minded, profit-making efforts. As Wible notes, “Design thinking pedagogy and practice helps us to understand one way that knowledge can be mobilized to foster co-generation of solutions that fit with a community’s worldviews and everyday practices” (“Design Thinking”). In harnessing the power of design thinking to create significant, community-based learning experiences for his writing students, Wible echoes our field’s longstanding commitment to “service learning” and engaged public work. Like Wible, we see design thinking as a way to energize existing pedagogical service models and opportunities. Reframing and adapting design-oriented pedagogy to reflect one’s own values is key to using this approach in ethical ways.

Inclusivity is another important ethical consideration of design-oriented pedagogy that often gets overlooked. Makerspaces tend to trumpet their progressive, bottom-up political orientations; they aspire to be free spaces for creativity—community centers for non-hierarchical productivity. As Ann Shivers-McNair notes, however, they are also predominantly white, male spaces (“What We Can Learn”). This statement rang true in our field research observations as well. For instance, in Neil Rothman’s mechanical engineering class at UMBC we encountered a large white male majority. This was surprising to us since UMBC has a reputation for having one of the most diverse STEM programs in the nation. According to Daniel de Vise, “Many higher-education leaders say no institution does a better job of seeding black students into the sciences than UMBC” (“Quiet Revolution”). The gendered make-up of the course was also extremely unbalanced (there was only one female student in attendance on the days that we observed). Even at a school that is known for its diverse STEM program, problems with diversity persist. We say this not to criticize UMBC in particular, but to point out a larger trend in design-focused classrooms: based on what we have read and observed, diversity may be getting more attention at the institutional-level but there is a long way to go for design spaces to be truly inclusive.

We want to suggest that one way our field might contribute to improving the inclusivity of design spaces is to bring design approaches to a general education student population. [Author’s name] class in the Studio Collaborative, for example, is an introduction to rhetoric course that satisfies a general education requirement. The students in this class, that is, are not yet segregated by historical patterns of major or specialization. Students – of all backgrounds – sign up and find themselves immersed in a design experience. We believe that by exposing students to design approaches in general education classes such as First Year Writing in a range of different institutional contexts, our field can contribute to the work of breaking down the historical exclusivity of these modes of work and workspaces.

---


After doing this research, we were struck by the fact that many instructors of writing and rhetoric already embrace some aspects—to some degree—of the design studio pedagogy we have laid out. For example, collaboration and the production of multimodal projects are common features of many first year and advanced writing and rhetoric courses. What we hope our work amplifies, however, is the need for more deliberate, explicit, integrated studio approaches in our field. That is, in order to unleash what we now see as the power of design-based approaches, we need to do a better job coordinating all four facets of design studio pedagogy in order to craft potent learning experiences. Our pedagogies must be complex—neither deterministic nor chaotic. We must push ourselves even further to design flexible frameworks for students to learn how to learn on their own and with each other. These pedagogical frameworks should immerse students in an ecology of materials, ideas, technologies, spaces, and people that can ground their learning in meaningful, high impact situations.  

We began this webtext with Paul Lynch’s provocative question: “Is teaching still impossible?” As we have attempted to illustrate, design studio pedagogy moves away from models of knowledge transfer and reimagines teaching as the practice of designing environments and contexts in which significant learning can take place. We believe this approach resonates with postpedagogy. Like Lynch, we would suggest that teaching is possible, even in a postpedagogical moment, when we learn to think of ourselves and our students as designers–as co-architects of learning experiences. Also like Lynch (and Dewey), we believe that each learning experience should be seen as cumulative and future-oriented: as an opportunity to exercise and strengthen habits of mind and body that enable us to better respond to and account for later experiences. 

What we observed in our fieldwork were students becoming; in design-based learning, students become different, often self-consciously, and more able to stitch together new experiences and knowledge with prior tacit knowledge, or “para-expertise” (Rice). This stitching together is what we have been referring to as “coordination.” Becoming happens constantly and idiosyncratically for each student in each moment, of course, but we have always known that. What feels different to us about the combination of design studio pedagogy and postpedagogy is that it encourages experimentation with new practices and areas of knowledge, small and large dispositional shifts, and the pursuit of thinking anew via the recombination of materials, ideas, and experiences. The design-based approaches we observed create complex experiences for students that avoid tipping too far over into either impossible determinism or chaos. And perhaps most importantly of all, students seemed to feel the truth that good work is rarely efficient—that good work can intentionally embrace periods of inefficiency.

Much like the students working in design spaces, we became different through researching and producing this webtext. As we immersed ourselves in design learning environments, we began to see immersion as a vital research method. We also began to think of the design of this webtext in terms of immersion. The multimodal artifacts we include from our own experiences are meant to provide a way for readers/users to experience the contexts we explored, however attenuated this second hand version of our experience might be. This pair of central ideas—that learning is coordination and that immersion is a method—is reflected by what we have said about teaching and learning, but also in our research methods and design choices. Through engaging with this project, we hope others find a potentially transformative experience, much like our fieldwork was for us.






